+++
title = "Craving, Delusion, and Unattached Desire"
date = "2025-09-28"
tags = [
    "nihilism", "awakening", "craving"
]
+++

Throughout its history Buddhism has had to fend off the charge that it is a life-denying or nihilistic philosophy. This view was certainly held by Brahmanical thinkers in ancient India, who were critical of Buddhism’s atheism and doctrine of no-self, but it has also been a regular feature of its reception in the West. Perhaps the most famous representative of this trend was Nietzsche, who wrote in The Antichrist that “[Buddhism] is nihilistic in the sense that it aims at nothingness: life is overcome by withdrawal, desire is extinguished, and Nirvana is the final goal.”[^1]

Modern Buddhists are often quick to dismiss Nietzsche’s criticism as a misunderstanding, pointing out that the thing Buddhism aims to liberate us from is what in the Pali is called _taṇhā_, which means craving rather than mere desire. A distinction is made between unwholesome desires to be extinguished and wholesome desires to be cultivated, and it is on this basis that Nirvana is distinguished from nothingness or withdrawal.

It may be tempting to leave it at that, but it seems to me that the picture is rather more complicated. Because it is also part of the Buddhist view that there is a fundamental delusion at the root of our experience of reality, and the effect of this delusion is that our worldy desires automatically take on the form of cravings. This perhaps explains why (despite protests to the contrary) it is not uncommon to find Nirvana described as a cessation of desire or feeling. It may be granted that the Pali word _taṇhā_ does have a stronger connotation of craving than the English ‘desire’, but since the ubiquity of delusion ensures that craving is coextensive with desire, the two are often treated as synonyms in practice.

Translating _taṇhā_ as desire rather than craving could even be seen as a way of emphasising the Buddhist message. If Buddhism just said that happiness is about freeing oneself from craving, then it wouldn’t be clear what it was adding to common sense. The substance of the Buddhist analysis lies in its further claim that the root of delusion makes craving an inherently difficult problem to solve—indeed one that cannot be solved by normal forms of self-development, but only through the attainment of insight.

The picture is further complicated by a tendency within Buddhist tradition to group wholesome and unwholesome desires according to their content: desire for spiritual liberation or for the well-being of others is considered wholesome, while desire relating to sense-pleasures tends to be regarded as unwholesome. This grouping can make Buddhism seem, if not exactly life-denying, then certainly conservative. But really the difference is not a matter of the content of a desire, but whether or not it has the form of attachment. Does this mean, then, that sensual desire can take on a wholesome form as well, or at least that there is a skilful way of relating to sense-pleasure that does not involve renunciation?

The issue is potentially quite complex. Certainly the point is not that enjoyment of sensual pleasure is unwholesome in itself, and the discovery that mindfulness can amplify the pleasure of an activity like eating is usually viewed to be a treasure of the practice. But things become murkier if we consider the intentions or actions we might take in the pursuit of sense pleasures. In the usual analysis desire first arises dependent on feeling, and in the next moment we identify with the desire, thus empowering it as action. This moment of identification is the link at which delusion is active, and at which we have an opportunity to break the chain of reactivity. But at the same time it is clear that we must empower _some_ intentions or desires, otherwise we would never act at all. What seems to emerge from this is a model of reflective endorsement: when mindfulness is established a volition can arise in consciousness without our being immediately identified with it. From this position of reflective distance it becomes possible to pose the question of whether or not we endorse it as reason to act.

And the idea, presumably, is that we should not endorse those desires that take the form of attachment. The fundamental reason for this seems to be that these desires are self-undermining, in that they are structured in such a way as to foreclose the possibility of their ever being satisfied. This happens, it is claimed, through the imposition of the self structure on experience—both the subjective and the objective poles of experience are artificially solidified so that the desire is represented as belonging to a fixed self, and the object of desire is projected as a self-subsisting entity that lies behind the flux of passing sensations. What is pursued is not pleasure itself but something more like the _concept_ of pleasure—the reified pleasure ideal that deluded consciousness imposes on the transitory, impermanent phenomena that constitute the actual experience of pleasure. This natural tendency of the mind sets up a dynamic in which the real experience of pleasure is constantly being passed over in pursuit of an ideal object of desire, one which is guaranteed to elude our grasp because it does not really exist.

The picture sketched above seems attractive to me, for three reasons. First, it situates the discussion within the actual dynamics of craving. It speaks to that category of experience in which we forget to enjoy the first drink because we’re already thinking about the second, in which the intensity of romantic infatuation destroys the possibility of genuine intimacy, or in which anxiety about outcomes undermines the relaxed confidence needed to bring them about. Second, it highlights the relevance of these teachings to specifically modern forms of alienation. Jean Baudrillard memorably described the essence of consumerist society as a “reduction of the real to its representation,” the cultural logic at the root of the familiar and all-pervasive junk food effect in which life becomes a constant process of oscillating between anticipation and disappointment, as the reality of the things we consume never quite live up to the ideal constructed in advertising and in our minds. Buddhism tells us that this tendency is built into consciousness at the most fundamental level, and that these kind of consumerist dynamics only work by latching onto and amplifying this pre-existing potential.

Third, it moves attention from the content of desire onto its form. It is perfectly possible to cling to the idea of liberation—this is why the whole idea of striving for awakening has proved so problematic within Buddhism, and has been such an important driver of its development over the centuries. But to recognise that spiritual or moral desires can have the form of attachment is also to recognise that our more worldy desires have the potential to take on an unattached form, and this points the way to something potentially very life-affirming. A desire liberated from attachment is a desire which can be fulfilled. This is the form desire takes when extricated from the delusional framework that takes the world as a collection of unchanging objects changing only in their relations to one another, rather than as a collection of ever-changing processes whose alignments and eddy currents present illusions of stability (anicca), that posits an equally stable self which stands in relations of possession or negation to these objects (anatta), and the impossibility of satisfaction necessitated by this scheme (dukkha).

[^1]: Quote appears in §20. {{<cite "nietzsche1895antichrist">}}