+++
title = "Emptiness and Dependent Designation"
date = "2025-10-05"
tags = [
    "emptiness", "nagarjuna", "constructivism", "hegel"
]
+++

> Whatever is dependently arisen,
> That is explained to be emptiness.
> That, being a dependent designation,
> Is itself the Middle Way.—Nāgārjuna[^1]

Many people have tried to explain the concept of emptiness in many different ways, but among these two broad approaches can be discerned, each emphasising one facet of the three-way identity between emptiness, dependent arising, and dependent designation given by Nāgārjuna in his famous verse.

The first approach stresses the link between emptiness and dependent arising. According to this interpretation, emptiness is the idea that things lack any intrinsic reality over and above the extrinsic relationships they enter into with other things. These may be cause-effect relationships, part-whole relationships, or any other kind of ontological dependency. Universal emptiness is presented on this view as a kind of metaphysical structuralism in which relations have ontological priority over their relata. This picture has various implications—that reality cannot be resolved into atoms or building blocks, for instance—but in it there is no special role for the perceiving mind.

In the second approach the perceiving mind is central, however, as what it highlights is the link between emptiness and dependent designation. On this interpretation, to say that a phenomenon is empty is to say that its existence is dependent on our conceptual designation of it. I recently heard this position expressed by Rob Burbea in a podcast, where he puts it by saying that things cannot exist independently of a ‘way of looking’. This view presents emptiness as a kind of metaphysical subjectivism, stressing the role played by our attitudes and conventions in producing the reality we inhabit.

While both approaches get at something important about emptiness, left as they are they also seem to miss something crucial. In Nāgārjuna’s verse emptiness is identified with _both_ dependent arising and dependent designation, and presumably what we’d like from a theory of emptiness is an account of how it links them. But neither of the interpretations above do this—in fact each appears to problematise the other. If emptiness is understood as a kind of subjectivism, then how can we can account for the objective structure of conventional reality? The conceptual designations we use are up to us, and so what’s to prevent their being arbitrary and this view collapsing into relativism? On the other hand if emptiness is understood as structuralism then while the objectivity of conventional reality is not threatened, it casts no light on our position as subjects within that reality. On this view emptiness of self is just one instance of the emptiness of phenomena in general, and so it provides no particular insight into what it might mean to realise no-self, and how this might transform our relationship to reality and to other sentient beings.

There’s a lot to unpick here, but for now I just want to gesture to an idea I rarely see mentioned in relation to emptiness: social constructivism. It’s often said that emptiness offers a middle way between existence and non-existence, but less cryptically we might say it’s about making a distinction between two different kinds of reality, namely _substantial_ reality and _effective_ reality. Something has effective reality if it is causally active in the world—i.e. it participates in the web of dependent arising—whereas it has substantial reality if it exists “from its own side”, which is to say as a substantial entity which could in principle exist by itself. To say that something is empty but not unreal is to say, then, that it has effective reality without substantial reality. That there could be such things is perhaps counter-intuitive, as effective realities are generally taken to be underwritten by substantial realities, but logically this need not be the case. Social construction is useful to think about in this regard, as it clearly illustrates the way in which effective realities can float freely of the substantial realities which are supposed to ground them. Even more suggestively, it describes a mechanism by which an act of designation produces an effective reality by falsely representing it as a substantial reality.

An example that illustrates this is the divine right of kings. In medieval Europe the authority of the king was predicated on the belief that it was God-given. The collective belief in this substantial reality—that the king’s authority was a kind of natural property belonging to that particular man, independently of the attitudes of his subjects—is what produced the effective reality of that authority, i.e. the fact that people would generally do things when the king commanded it. The authority is in truth no more than its designation (the subjects’ belief in it) but because that designation represents it falsely as a substantial reality (a property of the man himself) the designations are coordinated among the group, and the authority is brought into being as a de facto (i.e. effective) reality.

In this way we can see that things belonging to social-normative categories—things like property, money, laws, titles, etc—are empty in an especially vivid kind of way. They are causally effective without substantial basis, as a direct result of our collective designations. Admittedly Nāgārjuna’s claim is that emptiness is universal, and therefore applies as much to natural kinds like trees and planets as to social kinds, and it is harder to see how this mechanism might apply in those cases. The self, however—the paradigm example of an empty phenomenon that we mistakenly take to be non-empty— is something we might view as a social kind. To view the self as empty because socially constructed is to view it as an effective reality which is produced by its false representation as a substantial reality. I’ll wrap up this post with a few loosely collected thoughts and questions that arise from this:

1. If the self is socially constructed, then who is doing the constructing? There’s two possible answers to this, one top-down and one bottom-up. The top-down answer is that the individual self is a product of other people and their attitudes. This is reminiscent of Hegel’s model of mutual recognition, which holds that self-consciousness is realised in individuals only through their recognition of other conscious beings who recognise them as such in turn. The bottom-up answer is that it is the community of sub-selves—the individual processes of mind which may take the controls at any moment, may have conflicting interests and which we aim to unify in samadhi—that posit themselves as a single substantial entity. I don’t know how to make this point yet but my intuition is that the top-down and bottom-up accounts are convergent. There’s a question that often arises about the relation between morality and awakening in Buddhism: do we aim for awakening in order to bring about the end of suffering for all sentient beings, or do we cultivate morality in order to hasten our awakening? Neither answer is satisfactory, and it seems to me the only way out of this impasse is to find a really deep reason why these two goals are identical. This way of thinking about the self contains resources for this—it points to a profound structural identity between unification of the mind and moral concern for others.

2. Buddhism tells us that we are hardwired with a delusion of substantial selfhood and that this is the root of suffering, but no-one ever seems to wonder why we might be afflicted with this delusion in the first place. The social construction account gives an answer to this unasked question: we take ourselves (wrongly) to be a substantial self because this is a way of successfully producing an effective self, a means of self-creation. So the delusion does indeed have a purpose, the issue is that this particular means of producing an effective self is fragile and comes with structural problems, namely craving and dukkha. This both helps to show why Buddhism really does dice with nihilism—by undermining the substantial self there is a threat that the effective self will go with it—and why the project of awakening is ultimately positive in its aim to produce a version of effective selfhood which is freed from the illusion of substantial selfhood, and therefore from craving and dukkha.

3. There is a way this picture can make sense of the universal scope of emptiness, at the same time as recognising emptiness of self as a special case. Reificiation of self, it could be argued, is a sort of foundational reification that facilitates the rest. The false substantiality imputed to the subject has a corresponding effect in imputing an illusory substantiality to the phenomena that make up the objective world outside it. The reification of the objective world is, on this account, a consequence of the way that a reified self materialises subject-object duality for itself. It is not that trees and planets are socially constructed as such, but that their independent ‘thinghood’ is. A reified self necessarily locates itself within a world populated with objects it perceives as equally reified, as substantial and self-subsisting, masking their true nature as empty positions within the web of causal interrelations. Realising no-self, on this view, is exactly the same as realising universal emptiness.

[^1]: _Mūlamadhyamakakārikā_ Chapter 24, verse 18. {{<cite "nagarjuna1995middleway">}}