+++
title = "From Impermanence to Emptiness"
date = "2026-02-03"
tags = [
    "emptiness", "anicca"
]
+++

In this post I want to jot down a few thoughts on the relationship between impermanence and emptiness. This is inspired by some comments Rob Burbea makes in Seeing That Frees[^1], which came as something of a revelation as they articulate clearly something I’ve felt at an intuitive but murky level for some time. These concern the limitations of using impermanence as a primary framework for insight, and how a reorientation around emptiness can help move beyond these limitations. Implicitly, then, this is about issues right at the root of the origins of the Mahayana. But in typical Burbea fashion it is framed in a way that has direct relevance for practice.

In some traditional framings of the three characteristics of conditioned existence, impermanence is presented as the master concept that explains the other two. Phenomena are understood to be unsatisfactory _because_ they are impermanent. Anattā is understood as the recognition that there is no _fixed_ or _permanent_ self. But on closer inspection these understandings may appear a little flimsy. Does craving really depend on a perception of permanence? If I feel the need to reach for a beer after work, is the force of this compulsion really predicated on a sense—conscious or unconscious—that any pleasure or relief it might provide will persist beyond the immediate future? It is true that observing a desire as impermanent and subject to change can loosen its grip, but this observation can cut both ways. I have certainly had experiences where bringing the standpoint of impermanence to craving has actually seemed to increase its solidity and momentum—after all, if the craving is impermanent then so are the consequences of acting on it.

Another example can help pin down what’s at stake in this. Say you have a romantic infatuation that drags on and on. For various reasons—perhaps it is not reciprocated, or is reciprocated inconsistently—it becomes a whole cursed tangle of a thing, involving much dissatisfaction and pain. But one day it just kind of lifts, like the curtains at the end of a long and tragic play, and you are left looking at this person thinking ugh, this is just a normal plain old boring person with normal problems and normal warts. What was I thinking?

You could look at this experience through the lens of impermanence. The story here might be something like: there was an object of desire and then separate to that there was a desire, and while the desire may have seemed very solid and important while it was present in the end it was just a passing cloud. But while this wouldn’t be wrong, it does seem to miss something crucial in this experience. Because it is not just that the desire passes while the object of desire remains the same—in this moment when the curtain lifts, the object of desire is itself revealed to be something other than it had been taken to be. The real revelation here is that the object of desire was always a construct of sorts, never just this particular person but also your own mental imputation externalised in them. If the deep structure of clinging involves this kind of fabrication of the very objects which are clung to, then an impermanence way of looking that doesn’t explicitly target this fabrication will have limited application in uncovering and unbinding clinging in its gross and subtle forms.

And it is this point which moves us into the terrain of emptiness, because insight into emptiness consists precisely in this recognition of the fabricated nature of perceptual objects. To say that the self as such is a fabrication devoid of substantial basis is to say something much stronger than that it is impermanent and subject to change. This is not just philosophical nitpicking, but potentially has deep implications for how the path itself is interpreted. There is, for instance, a not uncommon idea of spiritual development which is explicitly predicated on the idea that the self is not fixed or permanent—it is, therefore, something that can change and grow. Yet this idea can nevertheless operate under a more subtle kind of reification of self, in which the various dimensions of skill, experience, and integration involved in practice are implicitly collapsed down into a single developmental scale. Such an idea can produce a sense that, say, proficiency in meditation and insight should also be markers for other forms of psychological integration. This idea may not be endorsed explicitly but may rather operate in the background, as when people find it hard to understand how a dharma teacher who is undoubtedly very wise and experienced could also be implicated in sexual misconduct.

It might be argued that the impermanence framing already incorporates the notion that phenomena lack substantial basis, because to posit a substantial basis is to posit an unchanging medium in which the various changing properties of an object are unified. But to make this argument is to interpret impermanence through the lens of emptiness. This is certainly not a bad thing, and indeed it helps us to see how an impermanence way of looking might fit within a broader emptiness practice.

But when impermanence becomes the core focus of practice things can take quite a different direction. It is well documented that attending to the aspect of change in experience can produce a refinement of attention into an ever more fine-grained, microscopic beam which hones in on the most minute detail of experience. The standpoint of impermanence can in this way be heightened into a standpoint of _momentariness_, where something like a ‘framerate’ of consciousness starts to become apparent—a direction of practice which has been emphasised within some vipassana traditions. This is undoubtedly fascinating, not least because the deconstruction of the sense of duration that can happen at this level of detail (or so I’m told) has resonance with findings from contemporary cognitive neuroscience, which concern how the sense of a phenomenal ‘now’ is constructed from multiple distinct brain processes representing non-concurrent sensory data as occurring within a single window of simultaneity. That it might be possible in meditation to refine attention to such a degree that it cuts beneath the construction of the phenomenal now is nothing short of mind-blowing. Yet it is also reasonable to wonder how any of this may help to unbind clinging.

As a final thought I’ll briefly consider the implications of these insight frames for the way we may think about samādhi and metta. The idea that an impermanence way of looking leads naturally to microscopic attention pairs with a corresponding conception of samādhi as laser-like one-pointed focus. While such a state certainly can be viewed as one kind of samādhi, to identify it with samādhi would seem to create problems. For example it would mystify the relationship between samādhi and metta, because after all what does laser focus have to do with loving-kindness? If we reorient to an emptiness way of looking, however, we might instead conceive samādhi simply as the collectedness or unification of mind that we naturally rest into when we fabricate less. To use another of Rob Burbea’s useful phrases, samādhi is just the other face of letting go. One great advantage of this way of seeing things is that the relationship between samādhi and metta suddenly becomes clear. The cultivation of loving-kindness is simply a direct means of fabricating less self. In this way metta and samādhi emerge as two aspects of a single process, which the standpoint of emptiness reveals as the process of defabrication.

[^1]: Specifically, in Chapter 12. {{<cite "burbea2014seeing">}} 