+++
title = "Impermanence, Impermanence, Impermanence"
date = "2025-10-20"
tags = [
    "anicca"
]
+++

[Test backlink]({{< relref "blog/two_flavours_of_nonduality.md" >}})

While all of the three marks of existence present their own conceptual difficulties, anicca (impermanence) has always seemed to me the most slippery, particularly where insight is concern. This is not because it is harder to comprehend than dukkha or anattā (unsatisfactoriness or no-self), but for the opposite reason that it is almost too obvious. We already know that relationships end, that we will die some day, that whims come and go, that tectonic plates drift and that a clay pot left in the ground for a few thousand years will crumble and decay. We also know that if we watch something long enough we will see it change. What, then, can insight into impermanence really consist in?

One thought is that insight into impermanence is not so much about observing elements of experience as impermanent, but about observing the way that our mind imbues the objects of experience with artificial permanence. Insight will thus consist, at least in part, of the recognition of a gap between the way we intuitively treat things and the way we know them to be. It could be argued that those of us born into the post-scientific world with our knowledge of thermodynamics, evolution by natural selection and cosmic expansion, are better placed to grasp impermanence than anyone has ever been. But this would just mean that the persistence of those default attitudes, which represent the world as infused with false permanence, should be all the more surprising—an even more fertile ground for insight.

Everyday cravings and aversions, for instance, seem to involve a perception of at least relative permanence. The form of attachment distinctive of craving manifests as a certain ‘solidification’ of desire, a projection of temporal persistent. A desire perceived as temporally persistent is one that demands to be satisfied, in that it may seem as if the only way to ease the discomfort accompanying an unsatisfied desire is by acquiring its object. That this is a projection of permanence is reflected in the fact that it gains force only by masking another means of easing of discomfort, namely by waiting out the desire. Left alone a desire can be observed to play out by itself and eventually to fade away. By directly noticing the impermanence of desire in this way, insight can filter into intuition and loosen the grip of craving.

The principle at work here is that impermanence is essentially self-revealing, in the sense that the only thing required to intuitively grasp something’s impermanence is to consistently bring attention to it. The converse of this point is that those things we take (falsely) to be permanent will be those we do not tend to bring attention to. Those things we technically know to be impermanent but which remain out of mind could be said to form the intuitively ‘stable’ background of life, against which the objects of our immediate attention dart and flicker. This picture goes some way to explaining why disruptions to that background, events which may seem inevitable in retrospect—the death of a close relative, a sudden deterioration of health—can seem at the time like an intrusion of the unthinkable. This points to a second, perhaps deeper form that insight into impermanence can take: the direct noticing of background elements as belonging to the background. Such a noticing implies the movement of an element from the background into the foreground of awareness, which will ensure its stability is revealed to intuition (not just to knowledge) as illusory.

Pushing this idea to its logical conclusion yields a third level of insight, concerning the universal scope of impermanence. Having engaged in this practice persistently, bringing attention to background elements which are thereby revealed to intuition as impermanent, we can imagine that we might begin to gain an intuitive sense of the impermanence not just of particular things, but of every thing. This has implications for the way we perceive change in general, because it is part of our natural way of seeing things that change is perceived as something that happens only relative to a fixed background. But what the universal scope of impermanence implies is that there is no fixed background, only impermanent phenomena unfolding at different rates.

A vivid example of how this might affect our intuitive experience is provided by an argument that originates with Aristotle, and that was an important source of resistance to the Copernican model of the solar system in the 1500s. This was the so-called ‘tower argument,’ which was taken for a long time to definitively uphold the Ptolemaic model according to which celestial objects revolve around a stationary Earth. This argument pointed to the fact that a rock dropped 1 meter from the top of a tower falls directly to the ground and lands 1 meter from its base. If the Earth were in motion, so the reasoning went, then the tower would have moved by the time the rock landed, and it would hit the ground at a different distance from its base.

This reasoning is now recognised as fallacious, and one crucial aspect of Galileo’s campaign to promote Copernicanism was his illustration of what goes wrong with it. He realised that the tower argument depends on the assumption that motion is absolute, which is to say all motion occurs relative to a universal frame of reference (an ultimate fixed background). Underwritten by this implicit principle is the assumption that except in clear-cut instances of illusion, apparent motion coincides with real motion (and therefore that apparent stability coincides with real stability). In developing what is now known as Galilean relativity—in which all motion is conceived as relative and there is no universal frame of reference—Galileo in effect undermined this assumption, and with it the intuitive force of the tower argument.[^1]

The fundamental point here is a counter-intuitive one: that once the idea that change is always change relative to a fixed background has been rejected—once we appreciate that our perception of change is only ever perception of change relative to things which are themselves changing, i.e. that impermanence is a true universal—we should expect the illusion of stability to be ubiquitous. While the analogy is somewhat impressionistic, in this example of Galilean relativity and the tower argument we catch a glimpse of how knowledge of impermanence, which in the first place may seem obvious, can ultimately yield insight into the fundamental nature of how reality is constructed in experience, so long as it is realised at the level of intuition and applied universally.

[^1]: A wonderful philosophical account of the conceptual shifts involved in the Copernican revolution can be found in Paul Feyerabend’s classic Against Method (1975).