+++
title = "Insight as Skill"
date = "2026-05-08"
tags = [
    "insight"
]
+++

One of the elements I find most attractive in Rob Burbea’s approach to dharma practice is the way he defines insight in terms of _effect_ rather than _content_. An insight, he says, is any way of looking at experience that releases clinging in the moment[^1]. This carefully sidesteps a common but unhelpful tendency to view the meditative journey as a progression through a series of waystations defined as distinct experiential states, some of which promise to leave our perception of self and world altered forever. Instead the path is to be seen as something more like the acquisition of a bag of tricks, a gradual accumulation of heterogenous bits of know-how together yielding an ever greater capacity for skillful responsiveness.

All for the better insight, I’d say. Because one thing that is clear is that experiences are cheap these days, even (especially?) peak experiences. You can just fly to Peru and buy one. Or better, find some back-alley neurobiologist prepared to apply a carefully targeted electrical stimulus to your brain—contrary to expectation, ecstatic or mystical experiences have turned out to be some of the easiest to induce through direct electrical stimulation. And it is well-known that episodes of mania or psychosis are often accompanied by extremely strong experiential states of subjective revelation, even where the sense of revelation attaches to delusional beliefs. An even more dramatic example is found in Cotard’s delusion, a rare psychiatric condition in which the sufferer insists with absolute conviction that they are dead or do not exist (apparently with the same degree of self-certainty that led Descartes to insist that he did).

These examples are not intended to call into question the value of peak experiences, but they do cast doubt on their epistemic status. What they show is that there is something like a phenomenology of _knowingness_, a felt sense of knowing detachable from any particular known content, and which has no trouble at all attaching to false or even contradictory content. The implication of this detachability is that the mere fact of being in certain experiential state cannot in itself furnish the meditator with justification for any claims the experience might incline them to make about reality, the nature of consciousness, or anything else.

This is not to say that insight has no experiential component—certainly it does. But insight cannot simply be something one _has_. It must also be something one reflects upon, articulates, discusses with others, cross-references, practices, and ultimately consolidates as a kind of skill. What is required is something like a process of mutual calibration between first-person experience and third-person reflection, which could perhaps be likened to the training of a wine taster. No-one would claim it’s possible to become a proficient wine taster by merely learning about the chemistry of wine without ever actually tasting it. Yet the chemical knowledge does play a crucial role in the process, and cannot be dispensed with. By repeatedly and systematically matching chemical elements in the known composition of particular wines to particular flavours and aromas known experientially through tasting, the aspiring wine taster gradually learns to discern the presence of particular compounds and contrasts—they learn, for instance, to (quite literally) taste the phenolic content.

There is a sense in which the casual wine drinker tastes the phenolic content too, but only in the dim sense the phenolic content contributes to the overall flavour. They don’t taste the phenolic content as phenolic content; they are unable to pick it out as a distinct element in the mix. A point Paul Churchland once made about this is that it is not only that the experienced wine taster possesses a skill which most of us do not {{<cite "churchland1985reduction">}}. It seems also that through their acquisition of this skill the wine taster has in fact _transformed the content_ of their experience. The experience of drinking wine is not to them what it is to the casual drinker, just as the astronomer’s experience of the night sky is different to the non-astronomer’s and the professional conductor hears something in the symphony most of us cannot. The conceptual discernment that comes through training makes possible a depth and richness of experience inaccessible without it.

Churchland then asks us to imagine a hypothetical future in which neurobiology has entered its ‘utopian’ era: our knowledge of the brain is complete and precise and technologies allowing us to look inside it to arbitrary levels of detail are cheap. He points out that in this situation we would in principle have the tools to each become the master tasters of our own inner lives, using those utopian brain sciences and technologies to train ourselves to reliably identify even the most subtle shadings of emotion in reference to the specific brain events they correlate with. Far from the devaluation of inner life many anticipate in the steady encroachment of neurobiology into the domain of first-person experience, according to Churchland the effect of this would be to open up vast new vistas of inner experience. Ultimately it would allow us to dispense with clumsy ‘folk psychological’ notions like boredom or grief, to be replaced by a neurobiological vocabulary enabling much finer discernments of conscious experience, and so, as with the astronomer looking up at the night sky, making possible new depths of appreciation, new modes of response.

Whatever your instincts may be with respect to this scenario, it makes vivid a certain interplay between theory and experience in the acquisition of a particular kind of skill, which necessarily brings with it a transformation of experience. This makes it helpful for thinking about the kind of transformation that insight is supposed to induce and how it might work. Insight practices are certainly not about mapping experiential qualities onto neurological correlates. They are rather about discerning the workings of a distinctive process, one which is always active in consciousness and in the construction of perceptual contents, yet which is at the same time hidden from consciousness on account of its reflexive identification with those very contents. And it is for this reason that insight is usually understood as beginning with the cultivation of skillful disidentification, in one form or another.

What the present line of thought helps us to see is that insight, which in the Burbea framing has a kind of counterfactual structure—if _this_ way of looking is applied, it brings about _that_ loosening—can be regarded as a skillset developed in the course meditative experience rather than as an experiential state in itself, and moreover how this illuminates rather than obscures the potential of insight to radically transform our experience of self and world.

[^1]: See e.g. Chapter 4 of _Seeing that Frees_. {{< cite "burbea2014seeing" >}}