+++
title = "Note on Immanence (or, Conventional Truth Without Ultimate Reality)"
date = "2026-02-24"
tags = [
    "abhidharma", "nagarjuna", "hegel"
]
+++

In this post I’d like to think a bit about the distinction between ultimate and conventional truth, and to consider to what extent these different kinds of truth should be taken as corresponding to ultimate and conventional levels of reality. This is a doctrinal issue which receives different treatments in different places, and reflecting on it can help clarify some of the more paradoxical teachings in the later tradition.

In the Abhidharma, ultimate and conventional levels of truth map onto ultimate and conventional levels of reality in a straightforward way. According to this framework the only ultimately real entities are dharmas, and ultimate truth is just the accurate description of these dharmas. The objects and phenomena picked out in conventional designations (tables, trees, emotions, selves, thoughts) lack ultimate reality because they are mere aggregates, perceptual and conceptual fictions overlaying the ever-flowing stream of dharmas. Nonetheless we may still speak of a difference between truth and falsehood at the conventional level, because some of these fictions are useful and others are not. The utility of conventional designations is unpacked in terms of whether or not they line up with the clusters of dharmas on which they are imposed. Ultimate truths explain what counts as conventional truth, and facts at the ultimate level underwrite the possibility of error at the conventional level.

This account has two components. The first is an ontology: dharmas are real, everything else is mental projection which may or may not line up with what’s going on for real. The second is the idea that truth is accurate description, in particular that ultimate truth is accurate description of ultimate reality. These two components add up to a fairly standard kind of reductionism, in which the ultimate reality of the dharmas serves as a non-conventional (or transcendent) ground securing the objectivity of the conventional world of appearances.

There are many ways of approaching the break with the Abhidharma represented by Nagarjuna, but one fruitful way in is to view it as a radical rethinking of this relationship between truth and reality. Of course Nagarjuna, following the Perfection of Wisdom literature, rejected the ultimate reality of dharmas, instead establishing universal emptiness as the ultimate truth. But it is essential to this account that emptiness not be taken as a competing description of ultimate reality. The claim of universal emptiness should be seen rather as a rejection of any attempt to give a positive account of an ultimate reality which underwrites the world of conventional appearance. The ‘emptiness of emptiness’—the climax of Nagarjuna’s analysis[^1]—makes clear that this is not intended as a new account of ultimate reality, but a rejection of the assumption that conventional truth must be underwritten by an account of the way reality is in itself.

This is sometimes called the ‘semantic interpretation’ of Nagarjuna’s theory of the two truths, which Mark Siderits has glossed as the idea that ‘the ultimate truth is that there is no ultimate truth’.[^2] This rather glib formulation can be put less paradoxically by saying that the ultimate truth is that there is no ultimate reality. The natural question arising here is, what then happens to conventional truth? The Abdhidharma finds a transcendent ground of conventional truth in the ultimate reality of dharmas. Nagarjuna appears to reject the very idea of a transcendent ground, so what, we might ask, could possibly make sense of the idea that some judgements couched in conventional terms are true while others are not? What makes a useful fiction useful, if not that it tracks some feature of things as they really are? What accounts for the objective content of conventional appearances? If no good answers to these questions can be found, then the charge that Nagarjuna’s position entails a form of nihilism would seem to be vindicated.

One answer, which seems to be standard in the tradition, is that this notion of a ‘useful fiction’ is just where the chain of explanation bottoms out. If the Abhidharma wants to explain the utility of conventional belief in terms of ultimate truths about dharmas, then the proposed alternative is that we just explain conventional truth in terms of conventional utility. It is common to see it written, for example, that conventional entities are like illusions. The only difference between ‘real’ water and a mirage in the desert is that the former quenches thirst while the latter does not. Some fictions are useful, others are not—there simply is nothing else to say about their truth, since utility is all that truth amounts to.[^3]

The problem with this is that the concept of utility doesn’t seem to contain the resources needed to pin down what we mean by truth. No matter how useful a belief is, I can always imagine a situation in which it is false despite this utility. Indeed, I can even entertain the possibility that at least some of my own beliefs are both useful and false. And if this is so then when I take it that some judgement is true, I cannot simply mean by this that it would be useful to believe. A proponent of the view might object that it is not intended to provide an analysis of the meaning of truth, but just that considerations of utility—including, perhaps, indirect considerations such as the development of our cognitive faculties as evolutionary adaptations—are what ultimately explain what it is we are doing when we call a belief true. But even so, on such an account it will always be possible to construct scenarios in which utility and truth come apart. Ultimately this route seems unable to provide a non-relativistic account of conventional truth, in which case it cannot claim to have secured the objectivity of the conventional and countered the charge of nihilism.

This brief sketch of what goes wrong with a utility theory gestures to a more general concern. If we reject the idea that the objective content of conventional appearance is determined by a transcendent ground, yet want to hold on to the idea that there is such a content, then we are left searching for something like an ‘immanent ground’. In practice this means that rather than explaining truth in terms of some correspondence between our conventional beliefs and the way things really (i.e. ultimately) are, we will have to explain it in terms which remain within the bounds of the conventional. But this is always going to create problems. Given any conventional belief and any set of conventional considerations which determine it as true, it will always be possible to produce further conventional considerations which undermine that determination. In essence, this is a version of what in philosophy of science is known as the Duhem-Quine thesis: given any set of observations it is always possible to construct multiple conflicting theories which adequately explain them. The whole reason to posit an ultimate reality—a way things are in themselves, independently of our conventional designations—is that it serves as a final tribunal before which disputes between competing conventional accounts can be settled. Without such a tribunal it seems the proliferation of conflicting conventional ‘truths’ can always proceed unchecked.

If there can be neither a transcendent nor an immanent ground of conventional truth, does that not mean that the tradition downstream from Nagarjuna cannot make good on its claim that conventional truth survives the analysis of universal emptiness? I think there’s a move that can be made here. It is not one I’ve ever encountered in a Buddhist context, but it is a key idea in German Idealism, and in Hegelian dialectics in particular. The trick is to exploit a certain asymmetry in the notions of truth and error. When interpreting an ancient text, for example, we may concede that it is impossible to ever reach its ‘true’ meaning. In this sense it is essentially open to reinterpretation. But this does not render it meaningless, and what seems to underlie this intuition is the fact that while we may never be able to settle the question of its unique true meaning, it is perfectly possible to identify wrong or implausible readings. In this respect, while interpretations can always proliferate this cannot be described as an unchecked proliferation—it is governed by an objective logic according to which erroneous readings are uncovered and discarded. Without ever making reference to a true meaning that transcends interpretation, the structure of a space of possible meanings is progressively articulated in the ongoing dialogue between conflicting interpretations.

It may not be possible to locate an immanent ground of truth, but perhaps all that is needed to avert nihilism is something more like an immanent condition of error. In Hegel’s system this immanent condition is given by the notion of internal contradiction. We do not determine what is true in our conventional experience by comparing it with an ultimate reality—this latter is a fiction (or in more modern terms: the evidence is always contaminated by theory). Instead what happens is that the experience of error manifests through internal contradictions in our total conventional theory of reality. Contradictions are then resolved through a process of reinterpretation in which the error is integrated (typically by uncovering and discarding the implicit assumptions that produced the contradiction, and/or by producing new interpretive hypotheses). There is no ultimate reality—a transcendent ground, a language in which the world speaks. Reality has a radically open texture. Yet this need not lead to the nihilistic conclusion that all conventional theories are arbitrary. Reality is always open to reinterpretation, but the integration of error provides this process with an objective constraint in the generation and resolution of internal contradiction.

Clearly this departs from accounts of emptiness offered by the tradition. Yet it sometimes seems to me that these accounts can vacillate between a ‘thin’ conception of emptiness which makes no difference at all to our conventional experience, undermining the claim that universal emptiness is a radical proposition with liberating potential, and a ‘thicker’ conception which, while certainly radical, never adequately responds to the charge of nihilism. While the quick sketch above leaves many questions unanswered, it seems to me to at least gesture in the direction of a resolution to this problem.

[^1]: The classic reference here being chapter 24 of Nagarjuna’s Mūlamadhyamakakārikā, “Analysis of the Four Noble Truths.”

[^2]: The semantic interpretation is not uncontroversial—see, e.g., [Giuseppe Ferraro’s criticism](https://www.jstor.org/stable/23497703)—but I won’t consider that dispute here. The rest of this post will not mean much to anyone who subscribes to a realist interpretation of Nagarjuna’s theory of the two truths.

[^3]: Something like this seems to be expressed by Chandrakirti when he says that “Everything the six unimpaired senses grasp and perceive within everyday experience of the world is true from the perspective of the world; the rest the world itself defines as false.” Madhyamakāvatāra, 6.25

