+++
title = "Preliminary Notes on Rebirth"
date = "2025-09-11"
tags = [
    "rebirth", "kant"
]
+++

Discussing the trouble aspiring practitioners may have with the notion of rebirth, Bhikku Bodhi once suggested that the Dharma can be initially approached without reference to past and future lives, and that openness to such ideas need develop only once one has come to trust the teachings as a whole. Trust of this sort is arrived at not by blind faith, but by applying the teachings and experiencing for oneself their efficacy in the here and now.[^1]

This is an undeniably neat package, one which resists the secularising tendency to dismiss rebirth as an add-on to the Buddhist worldview while preserving the spirit of empirical self-enquiry that distinguishes Buddhism from faith-based religions. It also appeals to a form of reasoning we already apply elsewhere. We do not place trust in science because we have verified each and every theory for ourselves; instead we find its practical success evidenced in numerous small ways around us every day. This generates confidence in the scientific community and its practices of knowledge production as a whole, whose items of consensus are then seen as reliable even where they concern topics outside the scope of everyday experience. There are some important differences—Bhikku Bodhi proposes the Dharma be verified through personal experience, whereas scientific verification involves intersubjective methods like replication and peer review—but the point that our acceptance of exotic truths is mediated by trust in the institutions or frameworks that successfully produce mundane ones is the same in both cases.

Still, it is important to this picture that rebirth plays an essential functional role within the edifice of the Dharma. If it did not, then a deepening trust in the Dharma would be compatible with a rejection of rebirth. What is this functional role? We know that rebirth refers to a moment in the process of cyclic existence, a process brought to an end in the attainment of nirvāṇa. But it is not always clear how this is supposed to link up with other teachings. None of it seems to be required to grasp the basic idea that suffering is caused by attachment to impermanent things, for example, or that it is our mental reactions to discomfort that often produce the most discomfort. On first glance rebirth may even seem to be in direct tension with another Buddhist doctrine: anātman, or no-self.

This final observation is often taken as the departure point for clarifying the meaning of rebirth. What rebirth is not, it is insisted, is reincarnation—the Hindu conception in which an eternal and unchanging self is transferred from one material body to the next, something ruled out explicitly by the no-self doctrine. Buddhist rebirth is instead understood on the model of causal continuity, with the metaphor often invoked that of a flame passing from one candle to another. The flame is just an unfolding causal process absent any unitary underlying substance, yet it possesses a certain cohesion as a process, one which is preserved as it is transferred between candles.

But what this leaves us with is a picture of rebirth that is, metaphysical technicalities aside, equivalent to reincarnation in practice. And it seems to me there’s a few reasons to be dissatisfied with this. One is the old matter of whether we have good evidence for it. If scientific naturalism gives us reason to doubt reincarnation, then it will do the same for rebirth if understood this way. One could perhaps resist this conclusion by maintaining that the causal continuity in question happens in the realm of consciousness only, independently of any physical happenings where it might show up empirically. But to make this argument is to commit oneself to a kind of psychophysical dualism, something I take it the Buddhist does not want to do.

I won’t dwell on this objection, as I believe there’s a more fundamental and more interesting problem with the flame analogy. If rebirth is interpreted this way then it is being construed as something that just happens, a natural process belonging to the general order of things—like the rising of the sun or the changing of seasons—whether or not we believe ‘natural’ amounts to ‘physical’, and whether or not we believe science has the final say in determining how the natural world operates. But if this is the case then the relationship between rebirth and the more psychological facets of the Dharma will be left obscure. If it is something that just happens, then how could delusion or unwholesome desire play a causal role in perpetuating the cycle of rebirths? How could the cultivation of an awakening factor like equanimity help facilitate an exit from this cycle? How would rebirth then differ fundamentally from another natural process like bodily death, which is not prevented by the attainment of nirvāṇa?

If we are to have answers to these questions, then it seems to me that rebirth will also have to be understood as a psychological phenomenon. This is certainly not how it has been understood by Buddhist tradition. But to reinterpret a cosmological phenomenon as a psychological mechanism does seem to me to be consistent with the anti-speculative, almost medical attitude of the Buddha we meet in the Pāli discourses. It is not uncommon to see karma given a psychological reading along these lines, but the same treatment is rarely applied to rebirth, perhaps because it is harder to see how it might work. But if it is part of the Dharma’s task to explain how cultivation of the mind can bring about release from saṃsāra, then it seems to me that the components of cyclic existence will ultimately all have to be understood in psychological terms.

‘Psychological’ is a potentially misleading word here. The goal of modern empirical psychology is to explain human behavior, whereas Buddhist psychology is concerned with how latent mental processes construct our experience of the world and ourselves. In this respect Buddhist psychology has more in common with the Kantian project known as ‘transcendental psychology’ than with any branch of natural science. In making this comparison I mean to suggest that rebirth might be understood as a concept properly belonging to the domain of transcendental psychology, in much the same way Kant regards space and time. This is to understand rebirth as referring to an essential dynamic in the pre-conscious mental processes that produce our default, unenlightened experiences of self and world, and not some fact about the mechanics of the cosmos.

Of course the analogy will only go so far—for Kant the role performed by space and time is a kind of synthesis: they are means by which the mind brings unity to the raw data of experience. If rebirth is to be understood as a category of transcendental psychology then it will have to be one that moves in the opposite direction, pointing to a tendency of the mindstream towards disunity or fragmentation, with the wheel of dependent origination then providing a causal account of how this fragmentation is brought about.

The aim of this move is not to push rebirth over the line of scientific credibility, though if it had that effect it would not be unwelcome. What drives it is the requirement to make explicit how rebirth fits within the broader framework of the Dharma. Because rebirth clearly is essential to the Dharma—it is what gives saṃsāra its distinctive cyclical structure, it is a key link between the Buddhist moral project and the goal of awakening, and so on. A secular interpretation which discarded it would no longer be Buddhist, and (more importantly) it would deprive the Dharma of much of its resonance. But equally, to treat rebirth as something to be left in the too-difficult basket until you’re bought in enough to take it as part of the bundle is to ensure that resonance remains mysterious. What a psychological interpretation of rebirth promises is a means of clarifying exactly why rebirth must end with awakening, a clarity which will necessarily lead to a deeper grasp of what both concepts truly mean.

[^1]: “The Buddha’s teaching has many sides, and thus, from certain angles, it can be directly evaluated against our concern for our present well-being and happiness. Once we see that the practice of the teaching does indeed bring peace, joy, and inner security in this very life, this will inspire our trust and confidence in the Dhamma as a whole, including those aspects that lie beyond our present capacity for personal verification.”—In the Buddha’s Words: An Anthology of Discourses from the Pāli Canon. Bhikku Bodhi (2005). p85.