+++
title = "The Logic of the Middle Way"
date = "2025-11-06"
tags = [
    "nihilism", "madhyamaka", "nagarjuna"
]
+++

In its original form, the Middle Way referred to a spiritual orientation that charts a path between the twin extremes of egoism and asceticism. But in its broader and more philosophical sense the Middle Way is usually defined in relation to the Scylla and Charybdis of nihilism and eternalism. These are not so much philosophical positions as common forms of answer which may be given in response to many different philosophical questions. Egoism and asceticism, for instance, correspond to nihilist and eternalist conceptions of the self. But equally there are nihilist and eternalist positions on morality, external reality, causality, knowledge, and so on.

But nihilism and eternalism are not quite the same kind of position, and are perhaps better seen as orthogonal to one another. Eternalism concerns the ontological status of something—to be an eternalist about mathematics is to hold that mathematical objects are substantially real and mind-independent (mathematical Platonism, for example, is a strong form of eternalism); to be an eternalist about morality is hold that there is a moral reality that exists prior to and independently of human attitudes. Nihilism, on the other hand, concerns our relationship to something, which is usually conceived in epistemic or normative terms. Scepticism is a form of epistemological nihilism—it says our claim to knowledge of the external world can never be justified. Moral nihilism says that we can never have reason to be moral, or to put it differently, that there is no basis for morality’s authority, for the normative grip it is supposed to have on us.

In this respect, nihilism and eternalism are logically independent of one another—the question of how I can be justified in my beliefs about the external world is separate from the question of the ontological status of that external world. But historically the two have been closely linked, in both East and West, in the specific sense that eternalist positions have often been adopted as a means of avoiding nihilistic conclusions. So we might think that in order to secure the authority of morality we have to first secure the objectivity of moral talk, and to do that we have to posit a mind-independent moral reality which such talk describes. Fundamentally, the Middle Way (in its philosophical guise) is a rejection of this whole idea that nihilistic conclusions can be avoided by adopting eternalist positions.

In fact it’s a bit stronger than that—what the Middle Way asserts is not just that eternalism fails to block nihilism, but that eternalism actually entails nihilism. If true then this implies that avoiding the nihilistic conclusion requires an explicit rejection of eternalism. A vivid example of this pattern of reasoning is provided by Nāgārjuna, who at the beginning of his Fundamental Verses on the Middle Way applies it to causality. The standard argument might be that in order to make sense of the presence of the causal relation in our experience of reality, we have to treat this reality as composed of self-subsisting discrete entities which can stand to one another in relations of cause and effect (a kind of eternalism about objects). Nāgārjuna turns this on its head to argue that if reality is made up of entities which really are discrete in this sense, then we cannot possibly account of the presence of the causal relation. If we are to avoid the nihilistic conclusion that causality is illusory or unknowable, then we must reject an eternalist interpretation of the relata of the causal relation.

Similar examples are found in modern Western philosophy. Mathematical Platonism has often been seen as an attractive position because it seems able to account for the peculiarly robust nature of mathematical truth. But it has also been pointed out that if mathematical objects really do exist in the sense required by Platonism then they will have to be very strange objects indeed, immaterial and unchanging at the least. But if so then it is unclear how they could possibly stand in causal relations with our own cognitive faculties, in which case how could we ever know anything about them? The very move that is made to secure the absolute quality of mathematical knowledge ultimately threatens to uncut its status even as regular knowledge. To argue that mathematical Platonism must be false if mathematical knowledge is to be possible is akin to Middle Way reasoning.

Same with morals. A belief in mind-independent moral reality is often assumed to be necessary to avert moral nihilism, but there’s a distinctively modern line of thought which argues that moral realism (as this form of eternalism is known) produces a problem of normative alienation, which ultimately undercuts the force of moral reasons. If ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are real properties of actions in roughly the same sense that positive and negative charge are real properties of particles, then how can we possibly make sense of the authority moral judgement is supposed to exert over our decision making? The various lines of thought which flow from this—clustered under headings like ‘metaethical expressivism’ and ‘Kantian constructivism’ and ‘quasi realism’—all share the basic idea that morality exerts authority over us only because it is an institution we create, not a reality we discover. The worry that this will undermine the objectivity of morality and reduce it to mere preference will have to be answered in some other way, and indeed much energy in contemporary metaethics is directed into this project.

In summary, the core point here is that the Middle Way is not simply a third option added to the pair of nihilism and eternalism, but is better viewed as a stance on the relationship between them. This stance, which inverts the traditional assumption that eternalism is required to avert nihilism by arguing that eternalism entails nihilism, and therefore must in fact be rejected to avert it, is epitomised by Nāgārjuna’s analysis of causality and other phenomena. But it is also embodied by the quasi-realist project in modern Western philosophy, which aims to reject nihilism in various spheres of discourse by rejecting strong forms of realism about their objects.