+++
title = "The Weird Materialism of Early Buddhism"
date = "2025-12-07"
tags = [
    "alterity", "insight", "materialism"
]
+++

A recurring theme in the Pali discourses is the so-called ‘reflections on the repulsiveness of the body,’ a set of practices whose prominence in the scriptures is difficult to square with modern sensibilities. A hefty chunk of the Satipatthana Sutta is devoted to these reflections, including a section on ‘cemetery contemplations’ in which the meditator is instructed to visualize the decomposition of their own corpse in gruesome detail. Similar examples are found elsewhere, such as this representative passage from the [Kayagata-sati Sutta](https://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/mn/mn.119.than.html):

> Furthermore, the monk reflects on this very body from the soles of the feet on up, from the crown of the head on down, surrounded by skin and full of various kinds of unclean things: ‘In this body there are head hairs, body hairs, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, tendons, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, pleura, spleen, lungs, large intestines, small intestines, gorge, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, skin-oil, saliva, mucus, fluid in the joints, urine.’ Just as if a sack with openings at both ends were full of various kinds of grain — wheat, rice, mung beans, kidney beans, sesame seeds, husked rice — and a man with good eyesight, pouring it out, were to reflect, ‘This is wheat. This is rice. These are mung beans. These are kidney beans. These are sesame seeds. This is husked rice’; in the same way, the monk reflects on this very body from the soles of the feet on up, from the crown of the head on down, surrounded by skin and full of various kinds of unclean things.

Not your average body scan. Sometimes modern dharma teachers present these as marginal practices intended only to address hindrances involving lust, erotic fantasy, or vanity. But this doesn’t really account for the prevalence of passages like these, which seem to indicate something far more central to mindfulness of the body, appearing more or less anywhere it is under consideration. A better explanation is that they reflect a tendency in early Buddhism to view the sensual world as something to be transcended in its entirety, in contrast with modern framings which stress how mindfulness can both moderate and enhance engagement with sensual pleasures. Yet this is still rather general and nebulous, and one wonders whether the sheer oddness of these passages isn’t concealing some deeper and more specific lesson.

What I’d like to think about is how this preoccupation with gore points to the function of materiality—or rather a certain encounter with materiality—in the process of insight. I can begin to unpack what I mean by that by turning to the familiar example of pain. During a sit an aversive reaction to pain may be skillfully handled by bringing a calm attention to the moment-to-moment sensory content in the painful area. Doing so reveals the pain to be something much less substantial than it at first seems to be: a flux of physical micro-sensations (of heat, pressure, etc), not unpleasant in themselves but which seem to float in an unpleasant atmosphere which is distinct from them. Something peculiar happens with this shift in perspective, a ‘defabrication’ effect (to use Rob Burbea’s helpful term) which exposes the pain as a conceptual imputation, an empty phenomenon no longer solid enough for the aversion to get a grip on. In this way the defabrication of pain into its components—the (material) micro-sensations and (mental) feeling tone around them—brings about a loosening of _dukkha_ in the associated sensory region.

What’s significant here is that the pain is first naively encountered as a simple bodily sensation, but defabrication shows that this “material” experience was always constructed through mental imputation at the same time as revealing its true material content, which is then encountered as something unsuspected and strange. This is why this kind of defabrication is sometimes likened to the experience of repeating a word until it loses all meaning, the sound of it suddenly seeming naked and strange in the absence of interpretation which is usually automatic and unconscious.

This strangeness may not be so apparent in the case of pain, but it becomes vivid in the defabrication of more pleasurable sensations. When first experimenting with mindful eating it is common to experience an increase in pleasure, perhaps even a dramatic increase. But turning up the granularity of attention and tuning into the moment-to-moment sensations lying beneath this pleasure can produce a similar effect to that described above in the case of pain—the aura of pleasantness separates out from the physical mechanics of chewing, the erratic movements of the tongue, the soggy matter being transferred from place to place in the mouth, all of which presents all of a sudden with a raw materiality that feels alien and kind of disgusting. The effect is not dissimilar to watching some creaky surrealist stop animation, like a [film of Jan Svankmajer](https://youtu.be/_E1DPgbCRhk?si=HR_VV_gwYJpJhF8F), a certain uncanny fascination. There’s a skeleton inside you and that creep is _eating_.

Insight experiences like these hint at what the reflections on the repulsiveness of the body may be alluding to. In naive or deluded consciousness what appears as a simple bodily sensation is in fact always a fabrication based on the intermingling of two distinct factors: materiality and mental imputation (rupa and nama). What the untangling of these two factors in insight experience provokes is an encounter with the material factor _in its pure materiality_, which is to say in the form of a radical otherness. The significance of repulsiveness, on this reading, is not so much to indicate a negative valuation of the body and its sensuality as that it encourages an encounter with the body in its fundamental otherness. This is not just otherness in the negative sense of being not-me, but a positive otherness which actively punctures and disrupts the field of conceptual imputation.

To look at it this way is to find in these early Buddhist practices a certain latent materialism. I use the word ‘materialism’ here because it is concerned with the inescapability of otherness in our contact with reality. Once we get past the substantialist tendency to categorise metaphysical positions on the basis of what kind of stuff they think reality is made of, the difference between materialism and idealism shows up ultimately as a disagreement about the status of otherness. The idealist idea that mind is fundamental to reality amounts to a promise that reality is something which is in an important sense already familiar to us; its task is then to account for the appearance of illusory otherness as an effect of dissociation, or the estrangement of consciousness from itself. But for the materialist otherness is irreducible and non-illusory, a basic facet of reality. Matter is just the name we give to this otherness, which manifests in the first place as the resistance reality puts up to our plans, to our theories, and to our unconscious mental imputations. Matter is the aspect of reality which pushes back.

Clearly, to read this kind of view back into early Buddhism is anachronistic at best, and I’m not claiming that early Buddhists were metaphysical materialists. The point of this is just to suggest that reading the tradition through the lens of materialism—something which in my experience many modern Buddhists in the West are extremely hostile to—can help to extract surprising lessons from parts of the Dharma that may otherwise remain puzzling.