+++
title = "Yogacara's Idealism"
date = "2025-11-18"
tags = [
    "yogacara", "idealism", "vasubandhu"
]
+++

I’ve just finished Ben Connelly’s book Inside Vasubandhu’s Yogacara, which while primarily a practice guide also doubles as a rather good primer on Yogacara philosophy. Yogacara can feel particularly opaque, and understanding which aspects are psychological and which are more philosophical, what those philosophical aspects are trying to say, which bits are minor modifications of the Abhidharma framework and which are genuine innovations, if or how it disagrees with other Buddhist philosophical schools, and so on, can be tricky to say the least. But for the purposes this post I’m going to put all that aside and focus on the key Yogacara doctrine of ‘mind-only’.

Mind-only has precedents in the early Buddhist texts—most famously in the Dhammapada, which [opens with the words](https://thedhammapada.co.uk/read) “Mind precedes all mental states. Mind is their chief; they are all mind-wrought.”—but its development in and centrality to Yogacara has led it to be described as a Buddhist idealism, and much of the discussion around Yogacara aims to clarify what kind of idealism it is. One prominent current construes Yogacara as a kind of metaphysical idealism, claiming that mental states are all that ultimately exist. Going against this current, Connelly gives an epistemological reading of the mind-only doctrine as saying that nothing in our experience escapes conceptual mediation (a claim which is non-committal with regard to how things actually are).

To make a comparison with Western forms of idealism, Connelly’s reading places Yogacara much closer to the transcendental idealism of Kant than to the subjective idealism of Berkeley. And if this comparison of Yogacara with Kant is even halfway right, it should warn us that it will likely generate all sorts of confusion. One of the worries often leveled against epistemological idealism is that it fails to define a substantial position distinct from metaphysical idealism, i.e. that it either says something too trivial to be substantial, or that insofar as it says something substantial it does so only by smuggling in metaphysical commitments. This in mind, it’s worth unpacking some of the implications to get a better grasp on what it’s actually saying.

In early modern European philosophy it was common to make a distinction between perceptible properties—like colour and smell—which are mediated (or conditioned) by our perceptual systems, and those—like shape, position in space and time, unity, etc—which belong to the nature of the object itself, irrespective of the mediating contribution of our own mind. Kant rejected this picture by arguing that there are no perceptible properties which are not mediated by our own mental faculties, including resolutely ‘objective’ properties like shape, time, and space. Many have since wondered how metaphysical this kind of view is. If space and time are transcendentally ideal in the sense that they represent the conceptual activity of our mind in structuring experience, does this imply that what cosmologists are studying is really just the contents of our own minds? If so, this really would seem to commit Kant to a kind of metaphysical idealism, and a somewhat implausible one at that.

But there’s another way of reading Kant. On this reading, which deflates the metaphysical scope of his idealism, the fact that nothing in our experience escapes conceptual mediation is just a banal consequence of the fact that concepts are how we get a grip on the world. If an elephant experiences the world by grasping it with its trunk, then it is correct to say that everything in its experience is mediated by the contributing structure of its trunk. But it would be wrong to then conclude from this that it does not grasp the real world at all. And it is the same, the transcendental idealist says, with the way our experience is structured by our faculty of conceptual understanding.

This is the kind of interpretation which is sometimes accused of triviality, but it has radical implications. What it amounts to is a wholesale rejection of a certain model of cognition which in the West is associated most strongly with Descartes. According to this Cartesian model our experience of the world is mediated by mental representations, which taken together form the inner world of consciousness. We stand in an unmediated relation with the mental representations themselves, and then there is a secondary matter of how accurately these representations on the screen of consciousness mirror the real world. The direct objects of our experience are mental representations, and our experience of these is unmediated. In this sense these primary experiences are infallible—you can’t be wrong about the way things seem to you. The mediation (and hence fallibility) is only introduced at the second stage. Kant rejects this two-stage picture, instead taking the view that when you experience a tree, say, you are not having an unmediated experience of a mental representation of a tree (which may or may not accurately represent a real tree). You are simply having a conceptually mediated experience of the tree.

If this distinction feels obscure, it can be illustrated with a simple example that will also help bring this back to Yogacara. Say you’re walking home at night and are startled by what seems to be a person lurking at the side of the road, but on second glance you realise it is a tree swaying in the wind. The Kantian has a very simple story about what has happened here—they say that you saw a tree and misapplied the concept ‘person’. But for the Cartesian a question arises about what mental representation was present when the erroneous judgement was made. If they say that there was a mental representation of a tree which was misinterpreted as a person, then this violates the idea that we have unmediated access to our conscious experience. But if they say that there was a mental representation of a person, as it seems they will have to, then this opens the door to a generalised scepticism. Because if such a disjunction between mental representation and object represented is possible, then how can we know our mental representations ever accurately represent the world at all?

The Yogacarin’s picture looks very similar to the Kantian’s. They would say both that your experience of the real tree is mediated by karmic impressions residing in the ‘store consciousness’[^1] (in this case the combination of evolutionary, cultural, and perhaps personal conditioning which sets you up to see an unexpected tree as a menacing figure), and that there’s no way of stripping away this mediation to get at the raw or ‘true’ experience. This is true both in the case of erroneous experience as in the example, and in normal veridical experience. Indeed, mind-only is the idea that karmic mediation is constitutive of our conscious experience in general.

Put this way the position I am attributing to Kant and the Yogacarin may seem reasonable, but the Cartesian intuition it runs counter to—that there is some intrinsic way that things seem to us prior to our mind’s conceptual framing of those things—is hard to shake. We tend to think there is some way a particular shade of grey looks, and are surprised by optical illusions in which the same shade of grey appears different depending on its surrounding shades. We struggle to get our heads round the fact that a C major scale and an A minor scale—two quite different tonalities—contain exactly the same notes. We believe that we can see colour in our peripheral vision, but under experimental conditions perfectly well-sighted humans prove useless at distinguishing even vivid colours at the edge of their visual field. Afflictions like Anton syndrome—in which a person who is anatomically blind, who has no activity in their optical nerve and will bump into obstacles and fail to catch a ball when thrown at them, will nevertheless insist that they can see—trouble us at a philosophical level. We want to know what it is these people are actually experiencing, yet it seems hard to say what that might be or even what this question might mean.

The mind-only view that nothing in experience escapes conceptual mediation also has implications for how we think about insight experiences and awakening. As intimated earlier, if there is no unmediated experience then all experience is fallible. In particular there is no special category of ‘direct’ experience (of emptiness, thusness, Buddha-nature, etc) that is intrinsically truth-revealing.

In the Thirty Verses on Mind-Only—the classic Yogacara text by 4th/5th Century Buddhist philosopher Vasubandhu that Connelly’s book is based on—there’s a striking example of this when Vasubandhu asserts that the other-dependent nature of a phenomenon, which is its ultimate truth as empty or dependently arisen, is itself a conceptualisation. This is an idea which goes against the grain of many framings of awakening, particularly those which lean on a metaphysical interpretation of mind-only. Among these it’s not uncommon to find the following story: consciousness is fundamental to reality, and conceptualisation is an extra layer added by our minds to the raw experiential flux, including the conceptualisation that separates reality into self and other. On this view awakening is about lifting this veil of conceptualisation to come into a direct (i.e. unmediated) contact with pure, unconceptualised consciousness, which is also ultimate reality. This is precisely the kind of model rejected by Connelly’s Vasubandhu. For Yogacara so understood, awakening is not about going beyond conceptual mediation but rather ‘resting in mind-only’—the recognition of the conceptually mediated nature of experienced reality as conceptually mediated, together with the recognition that there is nothing beyond mediation.

[^1]: The store consciousness (alaya-vijnana) is another key Yogacara concept, confusingly named as what it really describes is an unconscious layer of the mind where karmic impressions are stored.